Hello, welcome to God Day.
I'm Derek Walker, the pastor of the Oxford Bible Church.
And today I just want to look at one of the big themes, one of the big questions in the area of Bible prophecy.
And this is the question that if you look at the Old Testament prophecies about the coming Messiah, many of them predict that when the Messiah will come,
And he will establish a kingdom of peace on the earth.
And there are prophecies that talk about a universal peace on the earth that they will, all nations will lay down their weapons, they'll turn their weapons into pruning hooks, as it were.
There will be universal peace and prosperity that the Messiah will reign on earth for, you know.
Then, of course, as Christians, we believe that Jesus is the Messiah.
And so this is the question, why didn't Jesus establish his messianic kingdom in fulfillment of all the Bible prophets like Isaiah and Jeremiah and Ezekiel and so on?
Why didn't he establish his kingdom once he had obtained our salvation through the cross and rose from the dead and established the new covenant
Once he had done his work of salvation, why didn't he just go ahead and establish his kingdom?
Why did the church, because after all he told his disciples all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me.
So in his resurrection and ascension he received all the authority to be that king, but instead the church age has taken place.
And why?
And does that mean that that prophesied, promised messianic kingdom will never happen?
To understand what's going on here, it is necessary to look at, as it were, the transition from the old to the new, from the old covenant, the Old Testament to the new.
There's a transition period.
if there's an answer to that question.
As to why the church age came in rather than the messianic kingdom.
It's got to be found in that transition time and that is the time described in the gospels.
Or I would say the ministries of John the Baptist and Jesus Christ.
The answer has to be there.
If you like, we could put it like this, prophecy is like a big jigsaw puzzle.
All right, there's all kinds of pieces all over the Bible.
When you put a jigsaw puzzle up, you put up the framework, which are the main principles.
But another way of thinking of it is there are two halves to the puzzle.
You know, on the one side is all the Old Testament prophecies.
And on the other side is actually what happened when the Messiah came and brought in the church age and they don't seem to fit together.
How can we fit everything together and understand it as a whole?
And why did Jesus establish the church age?
Well, again, we need to understand the join between the Old and the New Testament, which is, again, the ministries of John the Baptist and Jesus.
The answer will be there.
Now, there are two possible answers.
And most of the church world has gone with the wrong answer, in my opinion.
It's not just an opinion.
It's basically, if you take the Bible literally, that means according to its plain meaning, the mantra I use is, if the plain sense makes sense, seek no other sense.
Not the mantra, but the saying that I would use.
In other words,
we should read the whole Bible according to its plain meaning.
That's the only way to truly be submitted to the Bible.
But one solution which I disagree with is to be to say that we need to not take the Old Testament prophets literally, when they describe this kingdom on earth of God, we need to spiritualize Bible prophecy.
In other words, I would say twist the original meaning
in order to make it fit with the church.
And so they would say, well, the church is the fulfillment of these prophecies.
Yes, it prophesies that even nature will be at peace.
The lion will lie down with the lamb.
And so we need to, that is still not happened, literally, but let's spiritualize it.
Let's say that the lion, the aggressive type people in the church will get on with the lambs.
the gentle lamb type of people in the church.
And so you spiritualize it and then you say, oh, well, all those prophecies, once you understand them spiritually, they're fulfilled in the church.
And therefore, there will be no kingdom, Messianic kingdom, with the Messiah reigning on earth from Jerusalem, that will not literally happen.
And sadly, from about the fourth century, the main
part of the church has bought into that explanation and it involves a rejection of the Bible as the literal interpretation of the Bible.
I reject that out of hand because I have to believe that the Bible means what it says and you need to interpret it according to how the original hearers would have understood it and they would have understood and the Jews still
would have understood of Jesus' time that the Messiah will establish his kingdom and it will be centered on Israel.
Israel will be the chief nation.
That's why Jesus returns to Jerusalem, not some other city, because he is coming as the king to reign over the earth from Jerusalem.
And Revelation 20 says that he will reign for a thousand years on earth.
And I believe that that is true.
So how can we understand it then
What happened was different to what was prophesied.
The church age was established.
Does that mean that this prophesied kingdom will not be established?
The alternative, which is the title of this message really, is that this messianic kingdom was postponed for 2,000 years.
Because Israel rejected the offer of the kingdom,
God postponed the kingdom for two thousand years and in the meantime he brought in the church age.
God cut off Israel as his anointed representatives and grafted the church into the olive tree which is the you know represents the gods anointed representative in the earth and for a time period we are in the church age but eventually
As Romans 11 says, God will cut off the Gentiles from that place and bring Israel back into her position.
As God's anointed representatives and God will again bring the kingdom forth through Israel.
And so this kingdom is yet to come in the future.
All history is heading towards the millennium.
the kingdom of God on earth.
When God will be glorified more than any other time in history and it will be the best time on the earth.
It will be the climax of history.
And the church ignores it because we're too busy thinking about the church age and we don't realize that there is greater things yet yet to come on the earth.
And we will rule and reign with Christ during that thousand years.
And this is a very big part of Scripture.
So that's kind of like the big picture.
The kingdom was postponed.
Now, we have a picture of that in the Bible because God brought Israel, God saved Israel at the Exodus.
And she spent about a year at Mount Sinai, and then God's plan A was that Israel would then go and possess her promised land.
And that's a picture of the kingdom.
Once God had prepared Israel spiritually, she would then go and possess her promised land by faith.
But because Israel was in unbelief and rejected Moses' leadership as it were, then she was not allowed to possess her promised land.
And she had to wander in the wilderness for 40 years.
until a later generation under Joshua possessed the promised land.
And in the same way, Jesus, the prophet like unto Moses, he offered Israel the kingdom.
But because they rejected, because of their unbelief, they could not possess their promised kingdom at that time.
And so they came under judgment instead, and they had to wonder in the wilderness of the nations for let's say 40 jubilis.
But there will be Jesus.
The greater than Joshua will return and bring Israel into her promised kingdom.
So that's what's going on.
This kingdom is, delay is not denial.
This kingdom was postponed and the church age came in instead.
But God will still fulfill his promises.
and his purposes, and he will establish his kingdom on earth.
Praise God.
So let's see this in the ministry of John and Jesus.
The major theme in the Gospels is Israel is offered the kingdom, but Israel rejects the kingdom.
And as a result, that generation doesn't receive the kingdom and instead comes under judgment.
Jesus came to suffer and die for our sins and it was also promised that the Messiah would reign over a kingdom of glory.
And the special thing about John the Baptist and of course Jesus is they were not just prophets before the cross, they were before, they were operating under the old covenant
But they weren't just prophets like previous prophets.
They were actually the fulfillment of prophecy.
They were the ones coming in to bring in the new dispensation, the new covenant.
And so they have a very special place in the scheme of things.
That's why Jesus said of John the Baptist in Matthew 11 verse 9 to 11.
He said, a prophet, yes, I say to you, and more than a prophet,
Why?
Because he's the fulfillment of prophecy.
This is he of whom it's written, behold, I send my messenger before your face who will prepare your way before you.
That's Malachi 3.1.
So John the Baptist was the fulfillment of prophecy, Malachi 3.1, the forerunner of the Messiah.
And then it says that John the Baptist was the greatest of all the prophets because he was the fulfillment of prophecy.
He said in another place in verse 13 that all the prophets prophesied unto John.
And so John the Baptist ministry was very important because a new phase of the kingdom came in that they prophesied unto John, but John was the one who was actually came to bring in the kingdom by preparing the way for Christ, who is the king.
And so
When we look at the ministry of John and Jesus, we see again and again that, for instance, in Matthew 3, it says that John came preaching, repent, believe the gospel for the kingdom is at hand.
And Jesus began to preach in Matthew 4, 17, repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
Matthew 10, 7, Jesus told his disciples, he said, as you go preach, saying the kingdom of heaven,
is at hand.
And Mark 1, 14 and 15, Jesus came to Galilee preaching the gospel of the Kingdom of God, saying the time is fulfilled and the Kingdom of God is at hand, repent and believe the gospel.
Now, we, you know, after 2000 years of church history, we don't get the fullness of what was going on here.
We have rightly take this individualistically
You know, that this is the gospel.
You know, I think of Romans 14, 17, which says, the kingdom of God is righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit, you see?
So when the preaching of the gospel is saying, the kingdom is at hand.
In other words, righteousness is at hand.
You can receive the righteousness of Jesus.
You can receive peace with God.
You know, you can receive forgiveness of sins.
It's available to you.
Jesus has paid the price and you can just reach out and receive.
Believe the gospel and receive your salvation and come into the kingdom of God.
And so we would rightly understand this as Jesus preaching to individuals saying the kingdom of God is at hand.
If you repent and believe, then you come into God's kingdom.
But the Jews would have understood.
that the Messiah, when he comes, he is coming to bring in the messianic kingdom, to establish his kingdom through Israel.
And Jesus was not just speaking to individuals, he was preaching to the nation of Israel.
He was saying, I am the Messiah.
I am ready to bring in the kingdom that was promised.
And if you will repent and believe in me as the Messiah,
you can enter into the kingdom.
And particularly as a nation, if you receive me as your Messiah, then the kingdom will be established.
The kingdom of God is at hand.
They would have understood that as the prophesied kingdom that all the prophets spoke about, this messianic kingdom.
And so they would have understood that Jesus was offering the nation.
that generation of Israel, the Messianic Kingdom.
And had they accepted him, then, after his death and resurrection, within a year, he would have established that promised kingdom on the earth.
The only reason he couldn't do that was, of course, the leaders of Israel had rejected him.
And so that's why you see this action in the Bible that Jesus is as it were declaring through his message and through his miracles.
He was declaring that he is the Messiah and he was forcing the leadership of the nation and the people to make up their mind one way or the other.
Are they going to accept him or are they going to reject him?
Because that was the decisive issue and increasingly as his ministry went on,
they increasingly rejected him.
And this offer of the kingdom came to a head at the triumphal entry.
That was when he was officially offering himself to Israel as her king.
Zachariah 9-9 was the prophecy he was fulfilling.
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion.
Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem.
Your king, the king of Israel.
is coming to you.
He is just and having salvation, lowly and riding on a donkey, a cult, the fall of a donkey.
And so Matthew 21 quotes that verse and says, Jesus came to fulfill that.
And so by riding into Jerusalem, according to this prophecy, Jesus was claiming to be their true king.
And he came in on the donkey rather than the war horse because he was not forcing himself on them.
He was offering himself in humility for them to accept or reject him.
And so he was offering himself to them as the king and he was offering the kingdom to them.
And we can see from the reaction of the crowds that they understood and the people
Many of them welcomed what he was doing.
We read in Mark 11, 9 and 10, those who went before and those who followed cried out saying, Hosanna, that means save now, save now.
They were trucked believing in him.
Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.
That's the official messianic greeting to welcome the Messiah.
They were doing their best to say yes to the Messiah.
And notice this,
Blessed is the kingdom of our Father David that comes in the name of the Lord.
They understood that he was offering the kingdom, the Davidic kingdom, the earthly kingdom where the Messiah will reign on the throne of David in Jerusalem.
Blessed is the kingdom promised to David, our Father David, that is coming.
They understood that the king was coming to them and his kingdom was coming to them in the name of the Lord.
Who's Anna in the highest?
And so
That is a clear sign that they understood that he was presenting himself to them as their king and he was ready to establish the kingdom.
And, you know, sadly, of course, at the same time, the leaders of Israel were rejecting him.
We see that in Luke 19, 39, it says, some of the Pharisees
call to him from the crowd saying, teacher, rebuke your disciples.
But he answered saying, I tell you, if these should keep silent, the stones would immediately cry out.
So clearly, they were criticizing the crowds and the followers of Jesus, proclaiming him as king.
But Jesus endorsed, he confirmed his messianic claims.
And he said that they're absolutely correct.
and he is confirming, but nevertheless it seems that the leaders were rejecting him.
And that's why Luke 19 describes this and he describes Jesus' response because he knew the response of the leaders.
And he said these words.
It says, as he drew near, he saw the city and wept over it.
And if you go to Jerusalem, there's a church about halfway down where
that is probably where this took place because there's a particularly good view of Jerusalem from this place on the halfway down the Mount of Olives.
The church is called Dominus Flavitt, which means our Lord wept.
And he wept over Jerusalem saying, if you had known even you, especially in this your day, in other words, this was the day when they should have received them as the Messiah.
If you would have known the things that made for your peace, in other words, had they accepted him, they would have come into peace under his leadership.
But now they are hidden from your eyes.
For days will come upon you when your enemies will build an embankment around you and surround you and close you in on every side and level you and your children within you to the ground.
And they will not leave in you one stone upon another because you did not know the time of your visitation.
This was the special time when he presented himself to Israel as the king, offering to set up the kingdom.
But because they rejected him, they wouldn't have the blessing of peace.
But rather, they would come under the judgment.
And so this was confirmed a few days later when he addressed the leaders of Israel in a great judgment talk in Matthew 23.
And he kind of concludes like this in verse
37 to 39, he said, oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the one who kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her, how often I wanted to gather your children together as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were not willing.
In other words, he says, I wanted to bring you under my authority, under my protection, under my blessing.
In other words, they could have come, accepted him,
And he would have established his kingdom on earth with Israel as the chief and most blessed nation.
But he says, but you were not willing.
But Israel rejected him.
See, it says your house is left to you, desolate there.
He's predicting the destruction of the temple and the city.
And he says, for I say to you, you will not see me anymore until not forever.
He won't be gone forever, but he's going to go back to heaven.
and they will not see him.
Until you, you, leaders of Israel, say, bless it is he who comes in the name of the Lord.
Then the leaders of Israel in a future time will actually repent of their rejection of Christ and they will say to Jesus, come, we welcome you to come and save us and be our King.
And that will be the cue
for Jesus to return in power and glory.
And then he will establish his kingdom on earth.
So the kingdom has been delayed because of Israel's rejection of the Messiah.
Israel has come under divine discipline and Israel has been cut off from being God's representative during this age.
But it will not be forever because in Romans 11, 25 and 26 it says,
Blindness in part has come upon the Jews, the Israel, until, not forever, but until, the fullness of the Gentiles has come in.
So once the fullness of the harvest of the church ages come in at the rapture, then it says, all Israel will be saved.
In the tribulation, God will bring all Israel to salvation when they will call on Jesus and he will return
to save his electination at the Second Coming of Christ.
And then he will restore the kingdom to Israel.
He will establish his kingdom on earth from Jerusalem.
Praise God.
And he will bring that about.
Hallelujah.
So this is the big picture of Bible prophecy.
Hopefully it helps you to see the overall scheme of things.
God has not finished with Israel, but she is under discipline, but God has brought her back to the Lord to the land in unbelief, but this is a stage of preparation for Israel to actually come back to the Lord.
And she will turn to God even in great tribulation and affliction.
She will turn back and realize Jesus is her Messiah and she will welcome him and he will return.
and establish His Kingdom.
So the Kingdom is not denied by God, but the Kingdom is postponed.
The Kingdom promised to Israel, the Davidic Kingdom, the Messianic Kingdom, the Millennium will be established.
Jesus said in another place, again the context being the leaders of Israel rejecting Him.
Matthew 21.43 it says, the Kingdom of God will be taken from you and given to a nation or a generation
bearing the fruits of it.
So he says, that generation of Israel missed their opportunity to possess the kingdom.
It will be taken from them and it will be given to a future generation of Israel who will bear fruit, who will believe in the Messiah and God will establish the kingdom through Israel.
That is why in Acts 1, 6, when Jesus appeared risen from the dead to his disciples, they asked him, Lord, will you at this time
restore the kingdom to Israel, and that's the kingdom we're talking about.
There is a time when God will restore the kingdom to Israel.
Jesus said, it's in the Father's hands.
He didn't say the kingdom won't be established.
He said, the timing is in the hands of the Father, but meantime, preach the gospel to the whole world.
You will receive the Spirit when
You will receive power when the spirits come upon you and you will be my witnesses to the ends of the earth.
And so right now we are to share the gospel to the ends of the earth.
But this church age is not the ultimate.
God is going to bring things to a close.
There will be the rapture and then the judgments of the tribulation and then he will establish his kingdom on earth.
And he will reign for a thousand years.
That's the big picture of prophecy before we go into the eternal state.
God bless you.
Amen.